## Stake Wars: Episode III. Challenge 001
* Published on: 2022-07-13
* Updated on: 2022-07-13
* Submitted by: Open Shards Alliance
* Rewards: unlocked at the end of Challenge 002.
Create your Shardnet wallet & deploy the NEAR CLI. This is designed to be your very first challenge: use it to understand how staking on NEAR works.

## Challenge submission
No submission si required for this challenge; it will be evaluated together with the next one (002).

## Setup NEAR-CLI
NEAR-CLI is a command-line interface that communicates with the NEAR blockchain via remote procedure calls (RPC):

## Setup and Installation NEAR CLI
View Validator Stats
Note: For security reasons, it is recommended that NEAR-CLI be installed on a different computer than your validator node and that no full access keys be kept on your validator node.

First, let's make sure the linux machine is up-to-date.
```bash
sudo apt update && sudo apt upgrade -y
```
## Install developer tools, Node.js, and npm
First, we will start with installing Node.js and npm:
```bash
curl -sL https://deb.nodesource.com/setup_18.x | sudo -E bash -  
sudo apt install build-essential nodejs -y
PATH="$PATH"
```
## Check Node.js and npm version:
```bash
node -v
```
_v18.x.x_
```bash
npm -v
```
_look like 8.x.x_

## Install NEAR-CLI
Github Repository for NEAR CLI.: https://github.com/near/near-cli. To install NEAR-CLI, unless you are logged in as root, which is not recommended you will need to use sudo to install NEAR-CLI so that the near binary is saved to `/usr/local/bin`
```bash
sudo npm install -g near-cli
```
Validator Stats
Now that NEAR-CLI is installed, let's test out the CLI and use the following commands to interact with the blockchain as well as to view validator stats. There are three reports used to monitor validator status:

Environment
The environment will need to be set each time a new shell is launched to select the correct network.

Networks:

* GuildNet
* TestNet
* MainNet
* Shardnet (this is the network we will use for Stake Wars)

Command:
```bash
export NEAR_ENV=shardnet
```
You can also run this command to set the Near testnet Environment persistent:
```bash
echo 'export NEAR_ENV=shardnet' >> ~/.bashrc
```

## NEAR CLI Commands Guide:
Proposals
A proposal by a validator indicates they would like to enter the validator set, in order for a proposal to be accepted it must meet the minimum seat price.

Command:
```bash
near proposals
```
Validators Current
This shows a list of active validators in the current epoch, the number of blocks produced, number of blocks expected, and online rate. Used to monitor if a validator is having issues.

Command:
```bash
near validators current
```
Validators Next
This shows validators whose proposal was accepted one epoch ago, and that will enter the validator set in the next epoch.

Command:
```bash
near validators next
```

Next challange ,Setup and Run your Node
